Claude Shannon figured out how the
compressibility of English text depends on how
predictable it is, so he made multiple attempts
at understanding the probability of each new
character in English.
His earliest experiments involved looking at
specific short sequences of characters and
tracking the statistics of what tended to follow.
For example, you could scan through a
couple books, look at every instance
where you see the letters TH and build
up a table of what tends to follow and how often.
The problem here is that this completely
breaks down for longer sequences of characters,
most notably those that never show up
in the text you're looking at.
But longer sequences give more context to guide
a prediction, which means that's when text is at
its most predictable and hence most compressible.
So to really understand the compressibility
of language, he needed some other way
to ask about these probabilities.
So he turned to one of the most readily
available models of language available
to him in the 1940s: His wife, Betty.
As the story goes, he pulled out
a book and asked her to predict
each new letter from a given passage.
Every time she guessed incorrectly,
he wrote down the correct letter,
and every time she guessed correctly,
he would replace the letter with a dash.
His idea was that this new string of text
had fewer actual letters, but it carried
the same information, in the sense that it
should give just the right prompting for a
duplicate of his wife to fill in the entire text.
This was a start, but his formal definition
of information requires knowing the
actual probabilities assigned to new letters,
so he needed something better.
In his 1950 paper, Prediction and Entropy
of Printed English, Shannon outlined an
experiment interviewing more people where
instead of just logging whether their guess
was correct or wrong, he would record how
many guesses were necessary for his human
guessers to come up with the correct next letter.
Separately, he combined the idea of statistics
with short sequences with number of guesses
to make an estimate at the implicit probabilities
that people were assigning to the true next
letter, based on their number of guesses.
His final estimate was that given at
least 100 characters of context,
English should, at least in principle,
be compressible down to around 1 bit per
character.
And I want you to notice, in order to make this
estimate, he was forced to go beyond pure data
analysis and probe at something intelligent.
Today, more than 75 years later,
the way we actually achieve compression close
to this limit is not through merely probing at
intelligence, but by making our best attempts
to engineer it.
This all comes from the first video
in a short series I'm making about
the idea that compression is intelligence.
If you want more, take a look at the channel.